I am currently obsessed with the game esp ra de by CAVE.

About a year ago I first got to the stage 4 boss. I found the first pattern doable, but the second pattern on seemed to be impossible to follow in a way that made reactions possible; no standard shmup approached such as bullet streaming and cut backs seemed to works; the affect of initial position seemed to be nonexistant both on the x and y axis nor did staying in any particular portion of the screen seem to help; and attempting bullet manipulation to create gaps created disasterous results.

Little did I know, my journey to beat this boss had started a year before, when I had tried to make a shmup myself. I wasn’t great at shmups, I couldn’t even beat stage 3 of Esp Ra De with out being hit once, let alone consistently. But I loved them. They ruined all other games for me by creating an incredibly dense onslaught of forced decision making. My ADHD could no longer handle any other game experience. I had correctly identified that this density was enabled and/or produced by the fact that any obstacle present in any given moment provided a challenge unique to what had come before. I was used to JRPGs where I had worked out the formula was A) grind while watching tv to level as high as possible,  then B) mash the “x” button to buldoze through every encounter, and AAA games where the challenge could be reduced to a complicated but still 1:1 simon says relationship where each solution was a specific move/combination of moves (by 1:1 I mean that the relationship of each obstacle to player is 1) demand a move, 2) the move is performed. Any variation results in that obstacle being “failed”). Sure it was complicated by items, and equipible weapons, and status effects; and sure a simon says request could technically allow for multiple different moves (I say technically, because at this point a large movelist is essentially reduced into 5 or so groups which results in even a 20+ move long list of possibilities becoming, in terms of the overcoming of obstacles, functionally 5 moves -- 6 if there are 6 move types and so on), but the variation in shmups were different. 

I thought I needed mechanical progression to produce the dopamine I crave. What was the purpose of pressing X for 36 hours straight over the weekend if it didn’t result in a slightly higher number and even quicker encounters that I could bash X for next time I turned on my playstation? Or in terms of action games, why would I play anything where my move or weapon list wasn’t drip fed over the entire game? This second point was pretty important to me -- I would get bored pretty quickly using the same moves every encounter I thought. I hadn’t yet realised that most moves or weapons in AAA games were essentially reskins of a small base set. Each reskin carried different values in set parameters (usualy each “type” would at least have some parameters specific to that type, but not always) which changed the experience of the encounters interms of the mechanical performance required of me -- a slower attack meant I had to have better reaction times…. OR just stand further away since the convention of AAA action games is that slower attack = longer range, and AAA games do NOT break convention in terms of meaningful gameplay (unless you’re nintendo).

Then I played my first shmup. I couldn’t understand what was happening. I couldn’t even visually process what I was looking at. It took me 6 months to be able to identify a single element in the back ground of DDP Resurection. I didn’t know what a cut back was, and 90% of my successful dodges were due to the fact I was on level one in combination with the tiny hit box. But resurrection has auto bomb so I didn’t really think about it. I thought the way to get better was simply to get better at dodging, to improve my reactions.

Basically, I had no idea what was happening. But that wasn’t important: I was engaged. Not a single part of me had to force myself to focus. In addition, I didn’t need the addition of a second screen playing a tv show at the same time, like I thought I needed to play games -- not only did DDP Resurection occupy 100% of my attention and produced a sense of engagement I didn’t know was possible, but the sheer intensity of every single second made the 2-screen approach to overloading my existential boredom impossible. It was ok, I had something better.

Eventually, about 6 months later, I had acclimatised to the sensory onslaught to the point I could keep track of my ship while moving, and where I had identified that there was a back ground present AND that back ground featured the ocean. But I wasn’t getting any further. 

When I said I didn’t know that this sense of engagement was possible, I wasn’t being entirely truthful. Was I meant was, I didn’t know that a creative product existed that could allow me to engage fully in the context of my current capabilities. I had been engaged before -- the first time was when I was 15 and read Catch 22. For the next 7 years, I embraced the joy of literary analysis; first by essentially creating a crash course in postmodern literature for myself through the combination of a lovely librarian in a  school that was brand new and thus had lots of budget for building resources such as the library and bookmarking the “postmodern” page of wikipedia; then by moving to Dunedin and starting an english lit degree with a double major in Gender Studies simply because A) “The History Of Sexuality Vol. 1” was the only philosophy (even though its closer to social theory) I had read, and B) the dunedin philosophy department was exclusively analytical philosophy, and the single continental paper ended in the late 1800s. Gender Studies or Media Studies were the two sites that presented any possible consistent engagement with french continental philosophy from the latter half of the 20th C, and it was 2012, I had been on tumblr since 2010, and the way you got cute people to kiss you was by calling everything “problematic”. This culminated with the discovery of Deleuze and Guatarri’s ‘Anti-Oedipus’, which remains the only creative product which has produced an engagement that rivals my favourite shmups: I honestly don’t know if DDP 1 or  Anti-Oedipus has changed the way my brain works (for the better) more. 

I also had discovered, when I was 16, another product that produced an incredible engagement: a cort bass guitar my music teacher let me take home and keep for a year without telling anyone. It was then I discovered the joy of creating. However, the energy required to do so, and the requirement of a certain creative spark to be present made it a less consistent producer of engagement than any book that clicked with my brain.  

However, by my early mid 20s I was no longer a student, and I had entered the work force. This was the end of this true sense of engagement. Work destroyed me. I had always needed copious tv or game time in uni, but this was different. I was unable to engage in ANY sense. It was then I discovered 2-screen mode. It didn’t make me engage, but it presented enough stimulus to overwhelm my unmedicated ADHD brain into being able to avoid the  obsessive  focus/awareness of how horrible it was to be alive that otherwise defined my life.

So the discovery of DDP resurection was particularly significant. Not only had I discovered something that was more reliable in distracting me from my suffering than the two screen method (which required finding a game + movie/show combination that allowed for just the right amount of awareness without effort to achieve the desired result) but I had found a way to focus again that was possible even in my current low-energy state. 

However the engagement was still akin to my first reading of Catch 22 as a 15 year old: it was incredible, but paired with a certain level of detachment.  Catch 22 is not an easy book, especially when the most complicated book encountered leading up to it was Perks Of Being A Wallflower. I can’t claim to understanding much, or even enough to amount to more than a few pages total. Still, it was enough to laugh at he “Major Major Major Major” section. But I had no idea of what the plot was, or who the majority of the characters were. I didn’t understand Yossarian as a person. But none of that mattered once I let the sense of being overwhelmed was over me. Instead, I picked up on that it was an exploration of paranoia, and that that same paranoia was represented/replicated somehow through the writing itself, separate from plot or character. I was in love with they way the book represented the experience of War, and specifically WW2 -- I had no interest in the action or machismo of war movies, and even at 15 I thought that the war was ultimately just a government sacrificing their citizens for politcal favour then reframing it as “noble” and a “sacrifice” -- it refused to glamourise or feed into narratives like the noble sacrifice. Instead it showed the war as how I had always understood it: a horrible experience for those it benefits the least, and not deserving of romanticisation in the slighted. Hower this was done through highlighting the absurdity and playing with humor -- which avoided the flipside of war representations I was aware of: where it’s shown as a sad and horrible tragedy, which functions only to distract from the fact that systems of power and control consciously exploited by those with access to them for the quest for more power and control, using the “resource” of human lives to do so -- creating a tone that tickled my brain in all the right ways and made me feel excited, despite not being able to tell you “what happened”. 

I could go on, but the important thing is, it was 10 years post-Catch 22, and I had accepted the “reality” that I would never be able to experience engagement again (I hadn’t read a book or written a song in years). The engagement I rediscovered was one of vibe, and rooted in confusion. But the best was yet to come.

As much as buying my first copy of Catch 22 is the single most important event in my life (as it produced the conditions for every other experience that matters to me to happen), my favourite reading experiences came much later, after I had studied literature at a uni level for a few years. I had access to a shared set of terminology I could use to identify and conceptualise writing techniques and their effects; the philosophies being engaged with; the conventions being utilized, avoided, or reshaped. 

This is what happened 6 months after my first shmuppin’. I got sick of being confused and started to research. I won’t go through the whole process, but this moment was significant. Up to this point I had been experiencing DDP resurrection as video game design pushed to its extreme. But I had never really engaged with a video game as a product of design before. All my experience of video games had been current to the present console generation and usually AAA titles. This didn’t mean I hadn’t played a retro game before; rather that I played in a way that brought the experience much closer to modern game conventions where the game’s main role is akin to a modern marvel flick -- appeal to as many people as possible for as long as it takes to experience once, then be put aside to make way for the next. For example, by using copious save states and rewinds, I experienced Super Mario Bros 3 as a game where each level was played once, failure set you back a few sections, and the skill being tested was the ability to enter the correct input for the current obstacle in isolation. 

This is a topic well outside the scope of this piece, but it is my view that the cultural “developments” during the 21st century have so far been defined by the transition from the “creative product” to the “content industry” as the dominant form of things that fall into that hard-to-name category that includes all those lovely things that (in the context of the last 200 or so years) don’t quite fit into the M-C-M conceptualisation of the labour cycle, but once was comfortably referred to almost exclusively as “art” (though I personally think that certain fields not traditionally seen as “art” functions the same and should be included; such as philosophy, which, as I will describe soon, has an identical function and role in culture as any other work that falls under the creative product umbrella -- be it Pride And Predjudice of Ninja Gaiden for the NES -- however, over 2500+ years of being constructed as being linked explicitly to ‘fact’ has produced a contrasting discourse that obscures the presence of this function and role in philosophical works). 

Ok fuck it, this is my document, I’m gonna go all out. This is now well inside the scope of this piece. When I mentioned “M-C-M”, I was referring to the Marxist formula that can be used to describe the process of production within a capitalist system. It starts with money, when a capitalist invests to purchase the commodities (C) needed for production. These commodities are split into two key types: the means of production (things like raw materials, tools, and factory space) and labor-power (the workers' ability to work, which they sell for a wage). During the production process (P), labor is applied to the means of production, creating new commodities (C') that now contain more value than the original components. When the capitalist sells these new, more valuable commodities, they receive a larger sum of money (M') than they started with. The key here is that the compensation received by the workers is necessarily less than the value of their labour -- otherwise the capitalist investor would receive no profit.

I love this model when considering jobs and labour. However, when considering the production of “art”, there are a few aspects that don’t align. Marxist theory ‘fixes’ this by including art works with the qualifier of ‘not produced for market’ but being ‘comodofied anyway’. However, the end result being comodified is relatively unimportant when treating the creative product as the focus of analysis (as opposed to the systems of capitalism which is the focus of the M-C-M formula): when considering a potential creative product produced by someone living today, the evidence provided by other creative products over the centuries suggests that the chances of said creative product surviving well beyond the lifespan of both the creator and capitalism itself is non-trivial. The value of a creative product might be culturally associated with the current systems of power, but this association is basically discursive and certainly not intrinsic. 

However, the creation of the creative product in question DOES exist, for all realistic purposes, exclusively in a capitalist context. However, the M-C-M model does not consistently sync with the realities of creating. To start off with, there are two interdependent realities of creating that complicate things: 1) creation is predominately seen as a recreation activity in the context of the current world that I live in, 2) the means of production for creative products exist simultaneously as produced commodities with a use-value: meeting the need AND the want to create. Sure, as soon as you finish an album you can release it on band camp for a price, technically making it prepared for market, but that assumes that the primary purpose of uploading music (as an example) is to be a market product -- I would argue that for the majority of Band Camp artists, the primary purpose could more accurately be identified as one of the following: to share something one is proud of; to enter your work in the conversation between creative products that generates more creative products created by others; to activate the creative product’s core function -- the  generation of new ways of thinking. 

Luckily we live in a world where truth isn’t a feasible goal (thanks postructualists!), so we don’t need to pick on of these to be the “main” purpose (nor do we have to limit ourselves to these 3). However, if I had to pick one, I’d pick the last. Let me unpack the significance of this proposed primary purpose.

The unspoken claim behind the last few paragraphs is my personal theory that creation =/= labour. I am including concrete AND abstract labour here. Labour, removed from capitalism, can be considered exclusively as the process that results in what is necessary for our needs to be met, and our wants to be addressed (to make a slight adjust ment from “our wants and needs being met” to better fit in with my personal conceptualisation of the function of wanting, where to want is expressable as ‘having a goal’).


However, as far as I can tell, creation seems to be a need itself. It certainly is to me. Sure you don’t technically die from being isolated from it, but neither do you necessarily die without a sense of community or friendship -- it’s still a need in that without it one stops engaging in the process of living, and starts simply existing. I’m not saying every person needs to write a book every year or they aren’t living a life. That would be unrealistic and exclusionary, but also it would conflate labour and creation when I’m arguing for their clear distinction. Labour’s value and defining feature is that it produces a tangible result that is not specific to the person enacting the labour; i.e., can be used by or is primarily in aid of another/others. Take the tomatoes away from the process of picking tomatoes and you’ve just been doing squats with bad posture. However, creation does not rely on the aimed for or implied end result for it’s value, neither is creation defined the fact it produces. To poop might produce poop, but to say to have poop is the defining feature of the act rather than to expel waste would be pretty short-sighted. Yet that poop could result in some pretty good compost which leads to some pretty good tomatoes, which lead to another person having a poop. The functioning of creation is the same: lets break it down.

.  Tit is an act of non-verbal communication (I’m not meaning the product here -- an audio book or play might involve verbal communication, but the process of creating it does not); the primary tool used, regardless of the product being aimed for, is the concept, 
First of all, Content has always existed. It might seem like it’s a new phenomenon based on the sheer density of it currently, but to think of every instance of music (for example) from a previous temporal position to be a creative product would be a mistake. oss of the authorial voice

I was able to examine the book in context of its relationship with other creative products, and trace the development of the canon of creative products through threads of response, influence and inspiration, as well as were a work had separated from a sense of expected trajectory and truly innovated. 

When playing DoDonPachi or Esp Ra De (especially esp ra de), I had identified a sense of extreme variation between each use of the same enemy type. The ways each individual enemy's attack pattern would sync up with the other shots suggested a wave system that sent an enemy list with defined values to a spawn system, or something similar. Some enemies had very noticeable differences in their  behaviour too, but this wasn't the case with every enemy type.

Wanting to achieve a game as good as those 2 CAVE shmups, I spent 6 weeks designing an incredibly indepth system for defining enemy waves and  creating enemy architecture that allowed for almost every factor, from  attack pattern to how long each identifiable phase (pre attack, main atack, screen leaving) to be defined in the level design process. I poured over the gang of four, and any other resource on possibly relevant design patterns, and agonised over integrating them with my chosen DOD approach. Due to how complicated the spawning process was alone, and how many interelated systems had to be used and coregraphed the carefully orchestrated use of design patterns was a necessity for creating any thing that could achieve the simple goal of running. I couldn't test the design for the whole six weeks -- the systems were so reliant on eachother, nothing could run till every component was finished. I only made one attack, and one movement behaviour to test, but I had also planned to program these in a significantly complicated fashion, with reactive and context specific behaviour. I believed that this was the required approach in making a game with depth -- how could ultimate variation be achieved without ultimate granular control of every possible parameter? I thought DOD was a neccesity too -- the heirarchies in OOP would certainly affect the amount of variation that could be programmed.
Somehow, by a miracle, I managed to get this birds nest running at the end of week six. I still don't quite know how; I am not a particularly gifted programmer, I hadn't followed any guides or looked at any code from other people, there was no formal documentation, everything was worked out not through any learning of practical programming skills (books on programming patterns and paradigm types are still the only programming related books I've read), but simply by sitting on my floor for hours with A3 sheets of paper drawing out mind maps to try and conceptualise how I could get the systems to work together in the context of a computer's linear 1 line at a time functioning, and at this point I had only being learning how to program for 1.5 years.
Yet one day, after every error message possible, I pressed play. The program booted. I can't remember if the systems functioned immediately, but I doubt it. Either way, at some point at the very end of week 6 I had a working spawning system that allowed for complete granular control over each aspect of each enemy, could save a configuration into an archetype, could organise enemies into groups that was also able to be archetyped to reuse, the groups into waves, and the waves into stages. On the other side of things, I had one attack pattern, one enemy type, one movement behaviour; my character controller allowed for 8 way movement, had normalised diagonals, and nothing else. I had no Idea even what moves the player would have.
Excitedly I closed the program and set to work creating a set of 5 differnt behaviours, patterns, and sprites. I think each enemy type had different parameters to create a sense of identity for each one but I'm not too sure. I then oppened up the first script used in defining a group of enemies to create my first real wave.
That was the last time I opened that project. To allow for the complexity of the full-controll archecture, my spawning logic was tied to time explicitly. This decision was coupled with basically every other element. This meant if I wanted an enemy to spawn to fill up a gap produced by a practiced player, well, I couldn't. Enemies could be spawned anywere on the x axis, but due to how the game logic produced that shmup convention where enemies are invunerable for an amount of time on entering the screen (and also stop firing at a high enough y value, i.e., down the screen, if they had behaviour meaning they left from the bottom), were basically imposible to spawn any where but at y=0. I had strived for variation and control. To allow for that to be produced through programming, I had to make other parts of the programming set an rigid. Most damning however, was the fact It took at least an hour to define a "wave" that lasted 3 seconds to run in-game. My system of ultimate expression was agonising to experiment and iterate with, AND boxed me into even more rigid corners than the limitations I believed would arrise from having a spawning system where each enemy type A has the same speed value (for example).
I'm working on a game. I am inspired by the game design elements that are shared between the 5 best shmups. Very few games have attempted, let alone achieved , this design style. The shmups in question are truxton, twin cobra, dodonpachi 1, esperade, and I think dangun feveron (though I need to play this one more to confirm). These games, plus one that I will name later, are the only examples I know of a yet-unamed design philosophy/school of games that I have identified. I consider esperade to be the best current example, and the others were stepping stones towards achieving this type of design. The philosophy isn’t necessarily specific to games -- I have written a novel accidentally based on the same principles, though the novel also happened to have highly accentuated ludic elements.

The design philosophy can be summed up as: extreme depth of the whole achieved through extreme simplicity of the parts. The guiding principle is that by keeping each element as simple as possible, the realm of potential interplay is as unburdened as possible. 

This design philosophy essentially flattens the disciplines of game design, programming, and level design into one. All the games that have achieved this sort of design were a) action games that prioritised smooth feel and quick pace, b) very difficult, and c) made for limited hardware (often even limited for the time). 

c) happens to be incidental. It was the condition that prompted this design style being “discovered” (the design style doesn’t appear to have been formalized  -- we have to assume all the games that achieved it did so unaware). Factor a) tends to be taste, factor b) tended to be a condition imposed by the culture of the time. All these games listed happen to be arcade games (the yet-unamed one isn’t, but was made to be difficult even for arcade gamers). Difficulty tended to be requested by those that funded  the games to be made - arcade distributors/publishers. Too easy games = no revenue.

Arcade games do not distinguish between 1 million players playing once each and 1 player playing 1 million times. These games weren’t made by any of the big game companies: they couldn’t compete in the arcade if they focused on spectacle or other tools of attracting a wide player base. Instead they achieved a design that continuously rewarded repeat plays over hundreds and even thousands of hours. The difficulty then, couldn’t be execution based.

By execution-based-difficulty, I mean difficulty that tests mechanical ability. We should also include execution-based-difficulty’s sibling, memorisation-based-dificulty. If an instruction to the player is the lock, and input is the key, muscle memory is the action that turns the key. Memorisation-based-difficulty just uses brain memory instead.

For one, execution-based difficulty will immediately exclude many players simply due to limitations of innate ability -- to make the difficulty significant for the expert players the execution demands will exclude the majority of players. This exclusion isn’t temporary either -- density-based difficulty still excludes, but it can be overcome. For many, execution demands will quickly reach a level where being incapable of beating a level transcends the realms of skill (skill being a essentially endlessly improvable quality), and becomes a biological (for lack of a better word) trait. 

Execution difficulty also tends to be rather “flat”, or non-dynamic. You pass or dont, the challenge is always essentially the same (you could randomise the required inputs for example, but in a true execution focused game that would create countless other design problems -- the difficulty curve would stop being a curve and just become a bunch of individual difficulty values that lack a clear link between them (from the perspective of the player’s experience) creating the feel of a random sequence of isolated challenges rather than a cohesive “game”. 
Another facet of execution-based-difficulty is that the difficulty is linear. By this I mean that increasing the challenge of a particular obstacle has a 1:1 relationship with the player input. No other factors effect the experience of the challenge presented on screen (in terms of the design/programming). If you could give each challenge a number rating, then put the moments in order of number rating the difficulty, the graph of (y = challenge, x = number rating) would produce a straight line with player ability only affecting the pass/fail condition. 

The type of difficulty the games of concern use is different. To explain it, the elements of their design has to be explained in full, so we’ll put that discussion on pause until later. For now, what’s important is that in attempting to achieve a more interesting/dynamic sort of difficulty experience AND achieve a fast, fluid action experience, the small teams that made these games faced one significant road block: hardware. The latest of these games was made in 1998 for out-of-date arcade boards. By this time in gaming history, arcade boards were no longer more powerful than home alternatives due to the failing industry -- the budget just wasn’t there -- AND these arcade boards in question were not ones that could be considered “top of the line” (to put it politely). 

Lets consider the genre of all the currently identified games of this design school: the shmup. The peak game in this school (according to me), esp. Ra. de, as well as its predecessor DoDonPachi 1, the two “true” “bullet hell” shmups (opinion justified below). 

These bullet hell games featured a MUCH higher bullet count than “classic” shmups. Every bullet on screen is a collision check (though this can be optimised w quad trees etc) every frame (or every 2nd frams in the case of our 2 bullet hells in this school). To allow for a high bullet count (somewhere in the realm of 200, and definitely more than 200 rather than below), these games had to be very simple in terms of programming. Bullets were limited to linear movement, with no curves or acceleration. In other words, the bullet component any given obstacle in game is produced through unchanging values defined at spawn time. By obstacle I mean any section identifiable as a challenge -- obstacles are hard to identify in shmups due to the small amount of breaks between obstacles + the overlap between obstacles, but the concept remains useful when discussing the design. Though enemies also damage the player, the enemy body themselves seldom result in any noticeable difficulty; their predominant function is to move a spawn point around that is used to determine spawn location in one or more bullet patterns. The challenge in the 2 bullet hell games in this school are almost entirely produced by the bullets themselves. Environmental obstacles arent present at all. 

By the early 2000s bullets with complicated behaviour was possible, perhaps most notably seen in touhou games from Touhou 6 onwards. This is one of the reasons that no touhou game comes close to the mastery of design expressed by the games in this school.

200 is a significant amount of bullets, but not enough to literally fill the screen or be dense enough for a single pattern (by single pattern i mean the onscreen result of a single algorithm being used in the programming that determines bullet spawn position, trajectory, speed, and spawn time for each bullet used in the pattern, as well as how many bullets the pattern uses: different densities can be produced by the same algorithm, i.e., a ring of bullets being evenly spaced can utilize the same algorithm whether it’s 10 or 100 bullets per ring) to produce significant difficulty. This created a lovely ballance between a high bullet count that produces multiple distinctive micro-obstacles, and the necessity of varied approaches to create a games worth of variation of possible obstacles/encounters. 

Later CAVE games like mushihimesama could handle over 10 times more bullets. This was a mistake. The lack of any significant limitation to how many bullets could be on screen at once (when considering that all bullets move and none have post-firing changes in behaviour/values, even the slowest bullets will be off the screen in the time span of seconds) allowed the devs to be lazy with the level design (or maybe just retain more control over the game than giving it to the level design team, maybe a result of game teams getting bigger and game devs being less and less involved in level design decisions), resorting to complicated programming of individual parts to produce single elements that constitute an entire pattern. This is linked to the now-available technique to use so many bullets in a ring oscilating with a complex algorithm that the “rays” form what effectively are wobbly lines. Many players love this, but it’s a very different school of design that sacrifices the depth and variation of challenges (making it more and more reaction or execution based) present in my beloved examples for a higher degree of on-the-surface spectacle. For one, the use of bullets so close they become lines consolidates a boss attack from what was (in esp ra de or DDP) a series of discrete moments with a multitude of micro obstacles that made it possible for any obstacle to contain micro-challenges that tested various skills. These high density patterns can basically only test micrododging. 


The good news is that these limitations might have been suggested by the hardware, but are still available to those creating games in the form of design rules. I encourage all people who make games to spend a significant of time designing the rules of the game. Not the mechanics, or rules for player success, but the rules of design that YOU will follow. This allows you to express easily identifiable, quantifiable factors that will result in the game you are dreaming of, and give you the language to express what aspects of the game design and development (including all aspects of the games production previous to when you pass off the product to another group) that you can actually directly control that will help the game meet your goals. It also will help significantly in the development of the game. We will continue this part of the discussion later.


DoDonPachi’s predecessor, DonPachi could also be considered the first bullet hell game. It’s made by the same company, with similar teams. It features very similar gameplay to DDP too, with the input-triggered moves of the player’s ship being virtually identical to DDP. In fact in terms of hard mechanics, DonPachi and DDP are very similar. The scoring system, and the scoring-specific “BOMB MAX” mechanic in DDP is different, the DDP bomb has two possible forms depending on what shot type is currently being used, and DDP ship selection includes a “shot” and “laser” variant for each ship. I would be surprised if the actual code (when translated to generic pseudo-code) differed at all in that all the key components are present, but that doesn’t mean that those key components are treated with the same priority or focus as the first bullet hell game that ALSO was part of the design school i’m talking about (DDP1): I personally wouldn’t consider DonPachi a “true” bullet hell in terms of level design, though mechanically it WAS the first example of a bullet hell game: it uses the exact same mechanics in terms of player control as DDP, the level design just isn’t tuned to these mechanics in the same way. In terms of design, DonPachi feels more connected to classic shmups than DDP does. Other so called “first bullet hell games” focus on surface level identifiers (such as bullet count) rather than considering design components -- these “early” bullet hells (batsugun for example) share more with DDP and Esperade in terms of having closer hardware power than they do with the design aspects of the games -- in fact, some earlier, decidedly NON-bullet hell games like truxton have a lot more similarities with DDP and Esperade in terms of design elements than batsugun or battle garega do (we’ll look at these similarities later).


Don Pachi was the first shmup that had the weak/strong shot type distinction, where the strong shot slows the movement speed of the player ship, and (crucially) the two shots are always accessible to the player. A consequence of these mechanics was that weapon switching in-run (i.e., changing weapon type being linked to something in-game like pickups) was no longer the de facto system for shmups. The role of items in general became less and less important. The other non-resource based offensive tool the player has in Don Pachi is the aura. This is a damaging area around the player ship that is activated whenever firing the laser. It does 2x damage, and is almost always paired with laser damage (since it is very rare that you face a medium or bigger enemy where your y position < the enemy’s y position -- y=0 being the top of the screen -- and popcorn enemies die in one hit so damage amount against a popcorn is functionally equivilent to max damage) making the effective damage of the aura against enemies x3.

Not every bullet hell use the same shot control: what’s important is that there are two movement speeds always available to the player that are input-dependant. Esperade has 2 shot types too, one weaker, one stronger. The speed choice is independent of the shot type though, with the first of the three playable characters also allowing both shot types to be fired at once.

The non bullet hell games in this design school have  


 These games are all, first and foresmost, made up of simple parts. 

First, the player mechanics. Compared to modern trends, the moveset is TINY. The particular moves aren’t essential to the de

No single enemy uses complex funtions, and very seldom non-boss/midboss enemies have more than one attack. The most complex movement gets is a sine wave (via look up table) -- otherwise there are no curves; a curved path effect is achieved by changing the direction the ememy is pointing every x amount of frames. Boss attacks are made up of >=2 parts that are VERY simple algorithmically - no complicated streams or mazes like later cave games. No bullet behaviour that changes values post-firing. For example, pairing an oscilating turrest with a steady shot rate firing 2 bullets at once and 2 variable bullet speeds decided at firing time for each fired pair + a little noise. OR a fan shot coming from the right of the boss, and an aimed pulse coming from the left. Very simple in terms of programming (leaving plenty of computing power for smooth graphics and a responsive feel). Enemy types have set values for their behaviour -- the might have reactive behaviour but if one enemy of type x comes on screen, waits .8 seconds, then fires an aimed shot every .5 seconds, then evey ememy of type x will have the same values for those behaviours. 


The difficulty then (for these games are HARD), comes not from a 1 enemy == 1 encounter style of level design -- instead an encounter is made by layering and sequencing lots of these basic single enemies from the same and/or different types. Though later levels might feature 2 patterns happening at once, games like castlevania and megaman treat the closest emnemy as the active challenge, then you move on to the next challenge. The style of games design I'm describing is different -- dificult encounters are formed by combining the basic building blocks of single enemies/bullet patterns into new, unique combination - no need for the repetition of obstacles when you design the obstacles to basically be modular!
Because of how simple and rigid the programming of each single element is, the context in which they are placed brings endless variation -- in a modern game 3 enemies of the same type placed together in a cricle, spaced by 50 px will make fundamentally the smae experience as the same 3 enemies in the same shape 60 pixels apart - this is because they are programmed to be dependent on the player, and often eachother, so the base values are essentially shifted and homogonised. In the games I'm talking about though, if enemyA 1  and Enemy A 2 are 20px away from eachother, the interplay between their shots will be very differennt than if they were 25 pixels away (the screen is autoscrolling, so distance=time). This means you don't need complex architecture for setting each enemies values, by making their programming as simple as possible you allow level design to function as an equivilent. In other words, by designing systems and gameplay around positioning (giving this value the most importance) you allow level design to play a more integral role, becoming an extension of the programming rather than a seperate stage. This allows for an expressive and intuitive work flow that priviledges the needs of the game over simply recreating conventions. With conventional modern level design (thinking 3d action games like God Of War), the ways enemies behave differntly based on context seems to be the primary focus of the enemy behaviour programming. This means that encounters must be designed around set encounter archetypes (for example:
Solo boss: A single, powerful enemy designed to be the main challenge.
Duo boss: Two powerful enemies who present a combined threat.
Boss plus minions: A central boss fight accompanied by a number of weaker enemies.
Boss, lieutenant, plus minions: A boss and one or more tougher "lieutenants," plus a horde of weaker enemies.
Wolf Pack: A group of close-quarters, melee enemies that coordinate to overwhelm a specific character.
Two Lines: A front line of durable, melee enemies with a second line of ranged or spellcasting enemies behind them.
Enemy Party: A group of enemies that simulate a party, with each member filling a specific role like a leader, defender, or striker.
Cultists: Spellcasters or healers supported by a number of minions who protect them.
The Horde: A very large number of low-level enemies that can be a test of endurance). This means that no mater how many enemy types there are, each one is designed around  much smaller set of roles (melee grunt, ranged grunt, healer etc). If these categories werent used level design with more than one type of emeny at once would be basically impossible, requiring the devlopers to create custom scripts for each encounter the level designers come up with to ensure the programming prioritising reactive, context sensitive, and COMPLICATED behaviour in each enemy types plays nice together. By reducing the functions of the enemies to a possible 3-8 or so game programmers can give pass on the level editor and  levl designers can create and test without changing the code itself. 
However, this comes with draw backs. It standardises encounter types between action games, so that player mechanics become the only real differentiating feature of the combat system of each individual game -- evem if made different teams. It also puts restrictions on enemy behaviour and design, limiting the options of creative expression for the designers of the combat encounters and enemy types. The game's I am inspired by have no such limitation -- since behaviour is so simple, a level designer can intuit how to behaviours will interact, and the 2D nature also simplifies the code needed, so no enemy stats need to be tweaked in the level design portion of development (except for when developers want to tweak values based on player/level designer feedback). To "tune" each interaction the level designers simply have to change the spawn location, which as explained above is akin to changing the values of the entire combined obstacle: instead of level designers having to script, or request a script, for a pattern that shoots aimed bullets in a steady pattern of two bullets with a space of .2 second between them every .6 seconds with each bullet coming from opposite sides of the screen), the level designers could just put two simple popcorn enemies at the required relative Y value (assuming vertically scrolling) to have that timed interplay that was desired, and x values at opposide sides. This allows for encounters to be designed based on internal game design decisions (i.e., based oin the individual game itself) rather than based on set archetypes based on other games' decisions (which creates games that all feel the same). It also means that encounters do not need to fit into any archetype -- encounters can be 100% designed for in terms of the GAME's individual need, not for genre convention or to fit in with artificial design constraints that are required to allow modern highly contextual behaviour programming to function. 
The role of enemies are different in those 3d action titles and the games I'm discusing too.In God Of War (for example), enemies are programmed to take turns in attacking (further reducing the impact of initial positioning). This makes each encounter 1-3 enemies (or so) at a time out of the entire wave. Here, wave != encounter, with a wave being MADE UP of many encounters.  Each enemy is programmed to function as an encounter in its own. In the shmups, the entire obstacle is constructed OUT of enemies (or patterns in the case of a boss). Especially since later shmups tend to add a bit of offset to aimed bullets, a single enemy that fires an aimed bullet isn't an encounter. However, stack 5 of them + a medium enemy with more health that fires a static half-ring (for example) and you've got yourself a bespoke encounter. Whats more the difficulty of this encounter is not determined by values stored in the programming (though these certainly AFFECT the difficulty). Rather the dificulty is a product of DESIGN, where enemy type combinations, number of each each type, y position determining spawning time and what is essentially the algorithm for determining the rhythms of the bullets within each shot cycle (like if you have 3 aimed shot enemies that are placed so they spawn withing .1 seconds of eachother, and that enemy types fires a shot every .6 seconds, the time btween bullets = (0, +.1, +.1, +4, (+1, +1 +4...))). 
positioning isn't just a crucial concern for level design.

Positioning in these particular games is the player's primary mechanic/focus of decision making. This is made possible for 2 reasons. The first is the limited set of run-specific/player adaptive conditions. Lets focus in on these now.
In shmups, the player only has affect on only two things external to the player character. First is  How quickly each enmy is

Positioning functions as the only tool the player has in affecting on the on-screen expressions of the lines of code that make up the game. This allows positioning to be utilized as the most significant offensive tool the player has in terms of the stage sections (i.e., sections that arent a boss or mid boss) that the player has, and as the only way to intentionally change the trajectory of any bullet whos pattern element’s algorithm includes an aimed component. I can’t think of a single game where the player reactive aspects have such a wide variation of possible discrete values (eseentially each x,y pixel position) creating such a large range of variation WITHOUT using randomness.

If any modern AAA game I know of attempted this approach, the difficulty would either rely purely on reaction speed or success would be effectively determined by chance. There’s a reason that most player reactive aspects of modern games are determined based on the current move being used/last move used by the player. Even in in a Devil May Cry 5, the single player game that has either the largest moveset, or a moveset that approaches a functional limit on the amount of moves a single player AAA game can have in the current game design culture (and also being a indication of highest moves in non AAA games, and it is VERY unlikely that a dev or dev team exists that doesn’t follow mainstream game norms AND  has the resources to finish a game where the character controller alone would take a realistic minimum of 10,000 total hours between each team member to produce, with a realistic number of hours being closer to 25,000) is around 105. If every encounter was designed around 3D practical limitations where there are seldom more than 2-3 enemies actively targeting the player at once, then this could technically produce a significant amount of variation that affects a player’s decision making, especially taking into account any enemy behaviour effected by positioning. When considering the highest difficulty can see 8 enemies attacking at once, the potential variation is significant. 

Lets be real though, the variation isnt expressed by the equation (active enemies * moveset * total enemy types) -- even if it was this still produces only 25,200 potential variations based on move. The functionality of move-based reactivity means that there are significant limitation of the range of responses to each move, with each enemy is limited to what is reducable to a parry which prevents damage and puts the player in a different animation, a backwards dodge, a dodge right, a dodge left, a jump, a duck, and a block that prevents or reduces damage but doesn’t put the player in a programmatically determined vulnerable state like the parry. If the game has a unrealistically high budget for the single player character action game, or a unrealistcally unconventional high budget block buster like a theoretical God Of War 3, then MAYBE each enemy type will have individual responses to each move, assuming enemy type is the determining factor in the specific reaction to each move. We have to admit the reality of the 105 large moveset however. Though the number is significant, there are only a approximate maximum of 30 moves available at a time, since moves are linked to specific stances as well as the weapon equiped when in sword master stance. For the sake of argument, lets continue to consider a possible moveset counting 105.

Disregarding the slim chances a game like this could be made in any percievable future I’ll see in my lifetime, the realities of individual responses is that each enemy type’s reaction could realistically be different in terms of animation, however, the functional effect of each response will be significantly limited. Each response will come down to one of the 7 possible reactions listed above. This also means there arent 105 different reactions for each enemy type, rather the player’s moves are divided into 7 categories defining each enemy type’s reaction. This is further reduced by the fact that not every reaction is available with every player move. A dodge left would be functionally no different from no reaction if triggered by a left hook for example. 

The best case scenario is that a secondary reaction is made available as an addition to any of the primary reactions. This secondary reaction could only be a “retaliation” action, or a “stun” animation. The stun animation is functionally identical to a hit-stun system, or other mechanic that produces a stun type. Being lenient though the timings could be made enemy type AND move dependant. The retaliation would simply overwrite the next move in queue with a predetermined move based on the player move used, and the time till next attack would be set to 0, or someother low value. This increases possible variation to the encounters,

The particular values could still vary between each enemy type in terms of distance traveled and time taken, or amount of time the parry disables player input. response bepositioning  games are designed to be essentially completely deterministic. First lets examine determinism in these game.

A considerable design decision that all these games share is the prioritisation of determanativity in the expression of the challenges presented. Even the use of randomisation is non-significant in run-to-run differentiation: since the arcade board has no OS, and has no hardware that allows the tracking of time, the psuedorandomness, at worst, could use player input as a seed. However since player input also results in differences in gameplay in the form of aimed pattern + static pattern interplay, as well as the effect of position + the use of shot or laser (or no attack button being pressed at all) on the enemies time-on-screen which determines on screen bullet count, the way we conceptualise determinativity for these games is that two runs that theoretically use the exact same input should produce the exact same result.This would still be the case, even if player input is used as a seed.

The game design also follows chosen design rules to enhance the experiential derterminism. These differ between each game, depending on the needs of the design and the range of player skills the design prioritises. As an example, we’ll focus on DDP1. Randomness in each pattern element is impercetable to me in all aspects aside from start position (which still creates significant differentiation, especially when considering the brevity of most pattern elements in this game). There might be variation in other values, but the fact that all the boss ring patterns (as a representation of the most significant challenges present by the game) seem to be learnable in terms of timing between each stream-crossing make this seem unlikely. Even the TLB’s frankly unreal most infamous pattern appears to me to be consistent in timing, and thus theoretically learnable, even if the rate of stream-crossings and the precision the tight spaces requires make this learnability theoretical only (the purpose of the TLB’s design seems to be primarily as a spare-life check, requiring an amount of extra lives left to beat, which encourages the 2nd loop player to go back and improve their performance in earlier stages rather than just focus on the TLB). 

Certain patterns such as the tank’s burst shot in stage 1 produce the effect of having true randomness. The shape and width of the shot is consistent but the position of the bullets within the shape is entirely unpredictable. However this has the effect of making the burst shot something to avoid by utilizing it’s delay between aiming and firing rather than being consistently dogable from within the shape itself. If bullet count wasn’t such a significant performance bottleneck for the hardware targeted, the same effect would have most likely been achieved by filling the burst shot shape with more bullets, creating an literally impenatrable chunk of screen. 

The importance is that a) DDP prioritises temporal positioning as its key factor contributing to player performance, b) when a pattern’s requirements to dodge the bullets lack the temporal space or forshadowing to allow for a dodging response that utilises reflex or the pattern approaches or exceeds the capabilities of human reaction speeds, a consistent rhythmic pattern is used (even if made up of many different values per repeat, or uses current repetition as a value to determine other values in the pattern) that provides a learnable factor for survival, and c) these aspects have the experiential reality of being consistent run-to-run OR have the source of their variation be easily identifiable and their effect able to be interpreted, if not truly anticipated (different player positions creating a different trajectory for aimed bullets being the obvious example).

The presence of routes is a crucial result of this fact. Though micro dodging will differ, producing different pixel values that are used for determining aimed bullet tragectory, a run of any stage section is repeatable to the point that a exact path can be drawn from section start to end stage, with y position (or the time that each point in the path is ocupied) taken into account too. This includes the same point having multiple visits due to things like sequential movements in opposite directions). The ideal of every run is to follow this path. In stages in which a scoring path is being followed, the get point timer and the amount of enemies that can be destroyed from any given temporal and spacial position can be used as a tool to construct, memorise, and recall your route.

Coming back to 


Luckily modern game engines alow the modern game dev to adopt the the techniques used by the games of concern that produce a comparable determinativity.  I can confirm that Godot 4.5 allows all the aspects that a game in this style absolutely requires to be achieved. Admittedly, not all the ideal aspects total are dev controllable, but this is an issue outside of game engines -- many of these factors are made to be impossible to change due to decisions made not by the engine, but the libraries used in the engine’s development (libraries that were used to enable communication with the hardware through the OS for purposes such as window management and rendering are a particularly notable offenders). This means that software made for any hardware with an OS (as far as I know, all modern options for game devs have an OS) is going to utilise floating point numbers at some point in the process, and this use of floating points cannot be identified or isolated in order to offset the non-determinative affects. However, even if DoDonPachi’s software was 100% determinative, the hardware had it’s own quirks: the generation of “random numbers” is tied to only being performed while the screen is blank (between frames), the timing of the CPU clock is determined by a particular quartz crystal, and the timing of these two elements are governed by separate values that should non-the-less be in sync. However variation in completely developer non-controlable aspects such as room temperature and the individual crystal itself and all create variation is timing, moving the two timings out of sync, resulting in a expression of random that is significantly closer to the non-digital ideal of randomisation (as opposed to digital’s approximation of the concept which is only pseudo-random). This makes the game possibly run differently on each arcade board, which is the same reality of a game made for modern PCs with different specs. More significantly, it means each run of the game has the potential to be altered by a factor completely isolated from the player’s input even on the exact same machine. Though I cant compare the amount of potential drift from an ideal 100% deterministic product between the DDP arcade boards and a godot 4.5 game for a single OS/platform, the fact is that even the platonic ideal (from current options) of this type of game design couldn’t achieve true determinism between different machines. Since determinism should be achievable on the same hardware, plus the facts that we can engineer a fixed point system and lock logic to frame rate thus avoiding delta time, we can consider true determisim to be currently unobtainable, and not agonise over it to the point of getting in the way of actually creating.
________________


But the only reason that the level design can produce said patterns is because of clever choices that result from careful design in the initial development. These could be considered  the meta mechanics -- the rules not of the game "esp ra de", but of the game "making esp ra de". I'm not saying that the developers set out with a conception of this type of game like I have. Rather, there were many factors that contributed to these particular rules being chosen. To save time we'll look at two only.
First is the genre of game being made. The shmup is fast paced, with densly packed challenges. The bullet hell shmup introduces more micro decisions to the mix . The key factor that enables this change is that there are A LOT more bullets than in the toaplan shmups (for example) -- more bullets means more variations.
The second is the limitations of the hardware. The arcade board being programmed for wasn't exactly top of the line, and this was at a time where arcade game development was no longer profitable enough to produce boards much better (or even as good) than home consoles anyway.
These two factors combined to produce the conditions for this school of design. DDP and esp ra de are the first two games since 1988's truxton to achieve this type of design (Hagane from 1994 comes close, but falls apart in its haphazerdly designed levels).  The linking element in terms of the reality of the developers is that they were designing games where the desired design goals were seemingly in opposition to the tools available.
in order to achieve the goals the team behind Esp Ra De had AND have the game work on the hardware, they had to look at the mechanics and systems differently. This discussion doesn't go into things like use of assembly, direct hardware interaction, the lack of curves, use of look up tables etc. These things are elements, but are well documented as being realities of the game scene during that era. Instead I want to focus on a design aspect that has not been discussed at all (at least in any resource I can locate) that was also produced as a response to the hardware limitations.
However, the density of challenges in shmups was even more significant in the bullet hell subgenre. The amount of different obstacles required to fit into even the short 30 min run time is no small amount -- enemy waves can occur around ~3 seconds even in earlier levels (as an estimate) which results in ~600 obstacles. Not a single obstacle is repeated. Whether it was linked to hardware limitations or not, the fact that bullet behaviour is fixed after firing (no velocity changes or acceleration for example) was also a factor in this: the option to add variation not through the making a different bullet spawning algorithm, but by taking an existing algorithm and loading it with a different type of bullet wasn't an option.
To achieve this variation in the late 90s, there was the increasingly popular game dev trend of context sensitive and reactive obstacle behaviour (read: "obstacle" as "enemy"). This wasnt and option. For one, by now, the genre expectations of the shmup were well and trully set. Shmups were perhaps the most difficult single player game experience available. What made this difficulty possible was that the game was virtually completely deterministic and the level design was completely intentional. Where non-player impacted variation between runs occured, said variaton was designed carefully and applied to single parameters at a time to produce patterns that utilized reactions but also "felt" the same each time so you could learn/get better at that particular pattern still. In addition, there appears to have been a non-trivial amount of tuning in terms of level design around tiny parameters re: timing and spacing to produce a difficulty that still feels like a successful run is a product of skill and knowledge rather than chance (even if managing randomness, and knowing how to avoid unpredictable situations when possible, are key parts of a player getting a 1st loop clear or better).
To create the variation through programmed responses to the on-screen context (based on the present screen state and/or the past), the devs would have had risk the chance of complicating the effects of player decisions to the point of being unlearnable. In adition they would have had to shift the construction of the challenges from being human defined and handcrafted to being produced by algorithms.
Instead the designers (who were the devs as far as I know) went for a conceptually simple solution. If the programming couldn't produce the variation needed, the construction of the variation would just be spread to other aspects of the game design. Simple logic yes,  but also something that I still find to be shockingly unconventional (or more acurately, I find this incredibly exciting) and inspiring. Game dev was a capitalist enterprise as soon as it left  the confines of the uni computer room. Certain conventions were assumed. Sure there are 3 games from the late 80s that fall under the same design school as esp ra de but they were 10 years prior (they also achieve less density and produce variation through less granular methods. Though the 80s examples are dear to my heart, I have no doubt in my mind that Esp ra de is the ulitmate expression of this school of design yet)! Game dev was technological -- to move the rules of the game away from the technology, severing that conventionally understood to be essential link was an unbelievable move. In essence, the priviledged position of the game mechanic in relation to the creative product of the video game was destabilised, flattening the heirarchy between the disciplines involved in the production of a game. The mechanic (which is required by definition to be a result of programming) was revealed to be not the medium of game design (if a painters medium is paint), but as a particular medium (medium this time being used to refer to a substance added to acrylic paint to change its texture) used to add a certain ‘vibe’ to the crucial element  -- the paint, or in this case, the design rule.
When discussing esp ra de, very few aspects of its design are present explicitly in code. In fact in terms of game logic, I asume the code was very simple (i.e., ignoring the difficulty and complexity produced through the use of assembly language, programming code that interacts directly with hardware, and the lack of engines/libraries and so on). The majority of enemies utilize only one attack, and I can only think of bosses and mid bosses with more than two. Movement is based on simple directional instruction without path finding. As examined earlier there isn't anything in terms of contextual behaviour EXCEPT for the very simple programming function of aiming a single shot or pattern towards player position. An enemy might have a single movement instruction, be immobile, or have a estimated max of 3 behaviours (on screen enter, main behaviour, on screen exit).
The player mechanics are also simple. 8 directional movement, normalised. One main shot, one secondary. Holding down the main shot button slows the player's movement speed. The secondary shot is of particular interest later -- for now just know that there's a bar that fills up to a max of 15 (determined by power level), and when the 2ndary shot is pressed the 15 (or whatever number it is currently) results in the same amount of 2ndary shot bullets being produced. These particular bullets are much slower than the main shot. The bar recharges by 1 whenever a bullet leaves the screen or after it finishes it's explosion animation if it hits an enemy. Finally, there is a barrier that functions more or less like a standard shmup bomb, except it is linked to meter rather than a discrete number of bombs in stock, and can be made more powerfull by holding the button down at the cost of more meter.

In terms of non-player mechanics, the only obstacles are enemies and bullets, bullets are given their properties through the use of patterns (design wise we’d calle these pattern elements), the screen scrolls automatically, the view is vertically oriented. There’s three lives with 3 extra available. One hit to the player takes one life. Defeated enemies drop power up chips that can be collected to level up the max amount of bullets available per 2ndary shot button press. There's a scoring system, where when leveled up to max enemies drop score chips instead. Due to a tiny condition that ALSO awards points for hitting an enemy (might be specifically a boss enemy) with the 2ndary shot, most of a score chasers’ score will come down to boss milking, so the scoring system in isolation isn’t that relevant in terms of changing how players experience the game. 

The scoring system is utilised by another system though, which ends up encouraging engagement with the stage-section-relevant scoring system to at least some degree. While leveled up to max any collected score chip is added to a counter starting at 0/200. When at 200 AND the barrier meter < max, the counter will drain and enemies will drop barrier charge items. Once drained the counter is set to 0 again, and the required number of score chips increases by 50.  

Boss behaviour is the most complicated part of the programming, but again no pathfinding. It does have positional targeting that is immediately identifiable as being rather involved compared to standard enemies (with the possible exception of the hover bikes in stage 4, but I can’t figure out how their movement is determinged). The stage 4 boss for example seems to determine what position is currently being moved towards by using player position + current attack pattern + next attack pattern. The Bosses and mid bosses are also programmed with multiple bullet spawn points with different pattern elements linked to each one. These parts can also have additional movement rules, such as a turret that oscilates while matching the main sprite’s global poision. This makes bosses the only enemies that provide a significant obstacle in isolation.


Enemy spawn logic is also defined programatically. Since the game is a auto scroller, the exact functioning is irrelevant (whether it’s based on frame count or camera position along the stage). More importantly the code allows for the option to have a section spawn extra enemies based on how quickly the previous enemy is defeated (as far as I know this is only used with mid bosses). Enemy behaviour is simple and defined by set values (i.e., is non reactive). Pattern behaviour IS reactive, but this is isolated to ONLY aimed shots using the player’s position to determine trajectory. There is also a low amount of noise that effects basic bullet parameters but I have no idea what parameters are included or how much variation in generated (it’s not much). 

That's it in terms of programmed rules.  In terms of how the game feels like to play, what sort of experience it offers, what an ecounter might look like, what skills are being tested, how the player mechanics are meant to "solve" the problem of each encounter, how a player's actions change the game, things that can be done to aid survival, and so on, the code tells us nothing. The presence of  aimed shots  being the single player reactive element that exists in the code is probably the most informative aspect.


Compare this to a character action game where the programming of the character controller along communicates a lot about the game, and an enemy script is enough to conceptualise what player skills a typical encounter tests (as a single enemy in these games can function as an encounter by itself). The general design principle is even discernable through the programming: the fact that the move list is significant, there are parry state, and different moves fall into particular categories (like airial attacks and evasive moves as basic examples) strongly suggests to the point that the focus of the game design is on reactive gameplay.


With esp. ra. de., however, we get next to no explicit info about the game. But that doesn’t mean we can’t figure some things out. Lets look at the character.  
Consider what is lacking: only the bomb and death produces i frames for the player (the bomb is severly limited through a resource requirement and death is a “fail” state and thus is generally avoided),  and only two attacks (and the barrier) are available per player character. The attacks have very few values: there are no status effects, no contextual specificity. Then in terms of the context the player and obstacles exists within: There is no gravity: any position on the screen is occupiable for as long as you want (in a theoretical obstacle-free mode).Crucially, there is no health bar, and losing all lives results in a hard fail state (a continue screen could be considered a soft fail state, but when considering that the game was basically only available in japan, that the devs are japanese, and that japanese arcade culture forbids continues if theres anyone queuing for the machine makes the hard fail state nature obvious -- the fact that all score is reset plus the shmup community shared cultural knowledge that a 1CC is the minimum requiremnent to consider a run of the game as actually winning reinforces this).


The lack of a diverse moveset in combination with the lack of free, or at least free-flowing i-frame moves is key. This basically tells us directly that the game is not designed according to modern conventions. The “simon says” aspect of modern games, where the solution to a particular type of enemy move is a particular player move, is unachievable with this code. Reactive based challenge in general seems unlikely: the lack of i-frames or states other than death and alive would result in an incredibly strict version of reactive based design that directly contradicts the strengths of that design. Reactive based design is great (not for me, but for the general consumer) for games with soft fail states, complicated enemy AI that adjusts dynamically + player i-frames to failure so a single mistake doesn’t snowball into failing that particular obstacle (losing a single life in esp ra deis the equivilent) or even into a fail state (losing all lives in esp ra de is the equivilent), and most importantly, a large moveset, different states/status effects, and perhaps most significantly -- a long play time per run (8 hours and longer as a loose guideline). I don’t know if this sort of game design requires the use of OOP in the programming, but it certainly would help. Esp. ra. De’s code is in assembly, which doesn’t mean you CAN’T program utilising OOP, but the short development time time plus the fact they were designing for the arcade in 1998 (low budget) certainly wouldnt make it easy. 

Now lets consider the Esp Ra De moveset again. The main attack is significant. Compare is to any atack in a AAA game. Even the most basic attack us a long list of value changes: the player character might move forward or it might automatically track slightly, the hurtbox of the attack might curve, or the player’s hitbox might move. The main attack in Esp Ra De is much different, essentially coming down to: if button pressed: is_attacking = true. Lets assume the narrow shot player character option for a moment: considering the value determining shot width, the fact it travels straight up from the player, and the fact that enemy movement is not tracked to the player, is seems like the attack  is functionally useless in most situations if used isolated from other input option. Many early encounters in a programmatically complicated game are beatable by waiting till the enemies approach then using the slight tracking properties and forward momentum of a basic atack to take them all out. Not so here.

The programming suggests that the key skill involved in offense in NOT the button press i.e., the skill check isn’t a direct input-based challenge. Lets consider the facts: the secondary attack is fundamentally the same move just with different bullet properties (i.e., it doesn’t affect the player character itself in any direct way), the same button used for the main attack is used to change speed mode while still attacking by tapping for fast and holding for slow, and the only other moves are to alter speed or a to bomb that has very few uses + is very helpful to have uses left in the late game deincentivising reliance on it. The evidence clearly points to one conclusion: attacking is meant to be used exclusively in conjunction with other moves: since the bomb is limited, the only option is the movement.The smoking gun is that there doesn’t seem to be any incentive to being in is_attacking=false at all -- this suggests that the function of the button is primarily to A) change the movement speed, and B) feel good. 

We now have all we need to determine what the game design prioritises in terms of interactivity. Lets summarise the facts from the “hard”, programmed rules: movement seems to be the only significant consistently available tool in the player’s aresenal in the sense that it is what makes the offensive primary and secondary shot mean any thing + barrier/bombs being so scarce; the only factors that directly affect what’s on screen through explicit code are slight randomness that is expertly harnessed, and the . 

the lack of complicated behaviour, the 

This is because esp. ra. de.'s use of rules goes beyond simply player experience. First, lets  consider the significantbenefits of directly programed game rules: Teams can rapidly prototype and test different approaches, the finished product doesn't have to be conceptualised in order to work on the game which means a game design can be developed and worked towards through the act of programming, the rules are garuanteed to be in play at all times unless there is a hard coded exception present.

By moving the core design into the realm of "soft" rules, those involved with Esp. ra. de.'s design sacrificed these safety nets for a potential depth. Consider esp ra de’s code again. First, the auto scroll values, the fact the ⁰scrolling stops at bosses, and the fact that bosses have time out states with hard coded values provides all the info needed to get an idea of the game length: ~30 mins. This is a significant rule -- designing for a short game vs a long one is very different. It suggests that repeatability is prioritised (especially when considering that the code would also tell us that the game is targeting a arcade board -- arcade games tend to focus around getting repeat plays over getting a wide player base). 


prompt a [Glacial, long-form noise sculpture for gallery playback. Wide stereo field of harsh, shifting high-band textures—granular hiss, brittle metallic scrapes, and distant machine-like roars. A single low-mid sine drifts microtonally under the surface, subtly modulating filters and distortion thresholds so upper layers shimmer and buckle. Slow automation swells density and brightness, with rare, almost subliminal dynamic crests. Mastering leans toward expansive, heavy presence and detailed high-end, inviting close, uncomfortable listening., noise.] prompt b [make it a upbeat bass music pop crosover hit song is can sing my own lyrics over]. cover prompt: keep the original idea in tact. now make it weird, silly, and dangerouswant to explore a noise piece where a sine wave is buried under a harsher ⁹ensemble. The sine should drift microtonally within about -49 to +49 cents, not as melody but as a hidden pressure source that causes harmonic disturbances and subtle instability in the upper noise layers.




(DDP in contrast does allow not attacking to be a significant decision through the existence of teh chain timer linked to the get point system: in terms of system design -- specifically the scoring system and the way it produces meaningful differences in gameplay and allows for a player to choose to make the game more difficult in the act of engaging with the score system without menus and allowing the decision to engage to be switched in and out of, not locking the player in to any permanent playstyle -- DDP is far superior. However Esp Ra De has the edge in the core design aspect of any action game with a limited moveset: obstacles, and more specifically how any given obstacle or challenge is constructed) their inherent . . Static movement and attack logic for